---
layout: post
title: A limit to our knowledge?
categories:
- Philosophy
tags:
- backreaction
- CMB
- phenomenology
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta:
  _edit_last: '4795594'
  _sexybookmarks_shortUrl: http://goo.gl/TYfDj
  _sexybookmarks_permaHash: 69bdf503e1c7636b988985fe4945accb
  dsq_thread_id: '232611001'
---
Over at <em><a href="http://backreaction.blogspot.com">backreaction</a></em>, Bee posted some nice <a href="http://backreaction.blogspot.com/2008/08/will-physics-turn-into-philosophy.html">questions about the present and future of physics and askes whether there will be a limit to our knowledge</a>. There are a hoard of responses to that post as well.
<blockquote><em>“Phenomenology” is the word of the day, and sometimes I can't but wonder what if that fundamental theory - should it exist - indeed does not make any testable predictions. Just consider it for a moment: There is a fundamental theory, but it makes predictions only in ranges far outside what we can measure. With the focus on phenomenology, aren't we then potentially discarding the path to go? It is not even that I believe it to be the case that a theory of quantum gravity would not have observable effects, but that possibility certainly exists (and who cares what I believe). So then what? What can we know? Can we know what we can know? What will happen to physics? Would the pursuit of such a theory still count as science?</em></blockquote>
For those who aren't aware as to what she is referring, Bee is talking about a <strong><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_everything">Theory of Everything</a> (TOE)</strong> that physicists are spending much of their time searching for nowadays. A TOE would be a theory that simultaneously describes all particles and interactions between them via the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_forces">four fundamental forces</a> (Electromagnetism, Gravity, Strong Force, Weak Force). So far, gravity is the renegade force that is causing us problems. It just doesn't like to play nicely with the others. When we try to combine it in the same way that was used to combine the other forces, we get gobbledygook results and infinities that can't be swept under the rug. So far, String Theory has been the popular candidate for a TOE, but so far it hasn't made any testable predictions, which is a major criticism of the theory.

I personally don't think that there should be any need to worry about a TOEs predictions being permanently outside the range of what we can measure. Certainly there will be a limit to how big we can build a supercollider, but eventually, I think we will be able to test predictions simply by looking into the sky and studying the remnants of the Big Bang, which is surely the largest explosion we could possibly study. Let me explain. The deeper into space one looks, the farther back in time one looks also (since the light takes some time to get here). So looking deep into space we eventually see what is now called the <strong><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CMB">Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB)</a></strong>. This is the light from the stage in the universe's evolution when the dense "soup" of particles quickly became transparent and allowed light to freely move through it, some of that light is now arriving at earth. The appearance of this CMB can give us information about how the universe formed. A Theory of Everything should be able to explain certain features of the CMB, and so we can indirectly check the validity of the theory. There may be certain predictions of any Theory of Everything that cannot be directly verified, however, I think many aspects of a TOE will have certain consequences for the evolution of the universe which can give indirect evidence for the validity of the theory. But, as always, I reserve the right to change my mind in the future...

Another interesting hypothetical Bee asked about was the following: Suppose there are <strong>two</strong> TOEs. Up to the limits of what we can measure, they both seem to be valid, but fundamentally they paint a very different picture of our universe. A silly example would be: <em>Two theories, both unify the four forces and describe all particles and the CMB and all that. But one of them is based on the fact that the universe is made of chocolate, and the other is based on the fact that the universe is made of cheese</em>. How would we know whether or not the universe is made of chocolate or cheese? I think that if both theories accurately described the observations we made of the world around us then, from a scientific standpoint, it really wouldn't matter what was <em>really</em> going on. In this scenario, thinking that the universe is made of chocolate as opposed to cheese would not impact scientifically, it would only impact socially. It would surely be an interesting question, and I think peoples' world views would differ greatly between the two ideas, but the science would not. For this reason I think it would be a time to leave the question up to philosophers to answer, at least until we found a discrepancy between our scientific observations and one of the theories. We could certainly assume that the universe is made of chocolate to help give us a decisive picture of the world in which we live. But the beauty of science is that at any point if something smells fishy, we can change our theory to better describe the world.

As for the question as to whether or not this is likely to happen, I don't know. I don't really think I have a good enough feel for the field yet to make a worthy guess. What I do know is that although it may sometimes appear otherwise, the world is full of clever people and (if we find a way to stop global warming) clever people will continue to be born. Science is historically a field known for its surprises. As (i think) Richard Feynman once said: Major scientific discoveries are very seldom followed by the cry of "<em>Eurika!</em>". More often than not, they are followed by: "<em>Huh. That's odd...</em>".
