---
layout: post
title: Eternal life - Dyson vs. Krauss
categories:
- Cosmology
- Philosophy
- Quantum Mechanics
- Thermodynamics
tags:
- Dyson
- Eternal Life
- Krauss
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta:
  _edit_last: '4795594'
  dsq_thread_id: '208082423'
  _sexybookmarks_shortUrl: http://goo.gl/R7pjX
  _sexybookmarks_permaHash: df2856c5be865785b25de620f1f4ed56
---
I've been meaning to post this for a while, but kept putting it off because I anticipated it being a rather long post. Several months ago I attended a lecture given by <a href="http://morningcoffeephysics.wordpress.com/2008/10/23/busy/trackback/">Lawrence Krauss at the CUPC</a>. He gave us an overview of a "debate" he had with Freeman Dyson about whether or not life could exist forever. Keep in mind, this is not an argument for the likeliness of eternal life, it's just simply addressing the possibility of it. In physics, the questions about whether or not something is even remotely physically possible are, many times, the most fun! And the ideas Krauss shared with us that originated from his back-and-forth with Dyson were so fun and interesting that I thought I'd take a stab at reproducing an overview of it all here. Keep in mind, I will be glazing over all of the mathematics and so if you want a more in depth look at the derivations of these results you should probably check out the original papers (<a href="http://www.aleph.se/Trans/Global/Omega/dyson.txt">here is Dyson's</a>; <a href="http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/astro-ph/9902189">here is Krauss's</a>). They are enjoyable to read if you have a physics background (and maybe even if you don't). So here it goes. Dyson vs. Krauss. But before we begin this faceoff, we need to buckle down and tend to a question that is begging to be answered:

<em>...what do we mean by "life"</em>?

Firstly, I must mention that we are not talking about eternal life for a single being. This debate was focused on eternal life for, say, a civilization albeit one that may evolve. Secondly, living things come in many shapes and forms, some of which we may not yet be aware of. It seems unreasonable to make the assumption that all forms of life are like those on earth; carbon based, dependent on water to survive, etc. In any case, Dyson and Krauss are both physicists and so for the purposes of their debate they were more concerned with the <em>physics</em> of "life" than its <em>biology</em>. Let me put it like this: we are not really concerned with the biological processes that lead to the thought "I think therefore I am", we are simply concerned with the existence of the thought itself to define "life". In other words, by "life" we really mean consciousness, or more simply, <strong>computation</strong>. Consciousness seems to have a lot to do with the firing of neurons which go about processing information much like a computer (or perhaps a quantum computer). Whether or not consciousness is really akin to some kind of computer program is a whole new debate in itself (perhaps some neuroscientist readers can comment on this). Despite this, computation must at least have a lot to do with consciousness and so surely by investigating the eternal existence of computation we won't be doing too badly.

So, what restricts us from running a computer program for all time? Well, the first barrier is: <strong>energy</strong>. Hopefully you are familiar with the fact that <a href="http://morningcoffeephysics.wordpress.com/2007/09/30/whats-up-with-this-expanding-universe-anyway/trackback">the universe is expanding</a>. Not only is it expanding, it is <a href="http://morningcoffeephysics.wordpress.com/2007/10/20/a-very-lonely-future/trackback">expanding at an accelerated rate</a>. It turns out that this puts a constraint on the amount of energy any civilization can harvest to keep them alive (computing). With a finite amount of energy available one might give up at this point and declare that life, which requires energy to sustain itself, can't exist for an infinite amount of time. Dyson, however, was still optimistic. He realized that living things are less concerned with physical time and are more concerned with, what he calls,<strong> </strong><strong><em>subjective time</em></strong>. Living things measure time by the number of thoughts they have, so <em>if a civilization can have an infinite number of thoughts using only a finite amount of energy, one could say that they have achieved eternal life</em>. This <em>subjective time</em> depends on the temperature at which the entity operates. So if we assume that the civilization has the ability to change its temperature at whim, at first glance it seems like the civilization can have an infinite number of thoughts (live for an infinite subjective time) if it keeps decreasing its temperature for all time (getting closer and closer to absolute zero, but never exactly zero). That strategy (again, at first glance) will allow an infinite number of thoughts using only a finite amount of energy.

So, is this strategy really possible? Well, in answering this question we come to the next roadblock: <strong>heat dissipation</strong>. Computation generates heat (there's a reason your computer gets warm when you turn it on). Living things will also generate heat. Even if we ignore all of the heat generated from familiar biological functions and only focus on the heat generated from thinking, we still have a minimum rate for heat production of a living entity. This heat has to be radiated away at a rate greater or equal to the rate at which the heat is produced, or the entity will "die" (there's a reason your computer's CPU needs a fan). Dyson considered this and deduced that the best way to get rid of waste heat would be through electromagnetic radiation. However, going through the math he deduced that the rate of radiation of waste heat this way would depend on the temperature and the number of electrons of which the entity was made. And if the life form kept reducing its temperature in this way, there would eventually be a time when it could not radiate its heat fast enough with only a finite number of electrons. So, this couldn't work. Did Dyson give up?

Nope.

Think about this: what if <em>you</em> really really wanted to go about running a computation on your laptop but your fan couldn't cool it off quickly enough. What would you do? What Dyson would probably do, is run the computation for a while, put the computer into sleep mode, let it cool off, wake it up, continue the computation and then repeat this until the computation was done! That's exactly what he suggested a civilization might try to do to live forever; namely periodically hibernate in order to get rid of the excess waste heat! The civilization could continually lower its temperature (decrease its metabolism) and periodically hibernate for longer and longer in order to have an infinite number of thoughts using a finite amount of energy.

A nice strategy... but this is where Krauss stepped in and poked a lot of holes in this argument. The first caveat comes from the necessity for some kind of alarm clock to wake up the civilization from its hibernation. Any alarm clock is inevitably going to be performing some kind of computation in order to calculate when it should "ring" and tell the life forms to wake up and smell the coffee. This alarm clock is subject to the same laws of physics as the life forms themselves and, as such, will eventually use up all energy reserves by the same arguments as above (since a hibernating alarm clock would defeat the purpose).

The second caveat comes from the fact that we are living in a universe which is expanding at an accelerated rate. It turns out that a universe with that property will be permeated by background thermal radiation (analogous to <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hawking_radiation">Hawking radiation</a>) which means a lower cutoff for temperature. In short, in a universe undergoing accelerated expansion there is a minimum temperature, which means that Dyson's strategy of continually reducing a civilization's temperature won't work.

Now, you may have heard a bit about quantum computers and be thinking: <em>"... but quantum computation doesn't necessarily require any energy. You can, in principal, do as many computations as you like without generating heat as long as you don't measure the result". </em>If you did think of that, great! However, as Krauss pointed out, you'll necessarily have to radiate heat if you want to do any erasing in order to prepare for a new computation. If you had an infinite amount of memory storage available you could ignore that point, but any civilization's memory storage is limited by the number of particles it has access to, which is (as with the case of energy) limited in supply. Krauss sums up this point well.
<blockquote><em>Thus any civilization can have only a finite total memory available, and resetting registers is therefore essential for any organism interacting with its environment, or initiating new calculations. While an existence, even nirvana, might be possible without this, we do not believe it is sensible to define this as life.
</em></blockquote>
So right now it looks as though life (as some form of computation), by its very nature, must end. Mortality is a necessity of life. I am actually fond of this wistful result. I find it gives life more meaning and makes it more precious... but that's just me. What do you think?
